Title: Getting off on the Right Foot - Project Inceptions
Date: 24 Feb 2012
Author: Mike Doel
Categories: Agile Practices
Keywords: inception, agile

## Getting off on the Right Foot - Project Inceptions

At EdgeCase, we've been in the business of building software for our clients for
many years.  In that time, we've come to realize two truisms about virtually
every project:

1. No matter how much thought a business owner has put into their concept of
   what is to be built, they always learn something when they explain it to
   the people who will need to execute on their vision.
2. A project that starts poorly will have a difficult time getting back on track.

Our response has been to develop a project inception process that we use when we
first engage a client.  In this article, I'll describe to you what it is
that we do, why we do it, and some of the lessons we've learned along the way.

### The Motivation
The goal of the inception is to educate both the client and us.  We frequently
find that clients come to us believing they fully understand the vision for
the product to be built.  And while they are undoubtedly better prepared for
the project than us initially, we've found that the questions asked during
the inception help them uncover issues not previously considered.

Even in cases where the client is confident in their understanding of what
they want, the act of going through an inception is valuable for us.  In a
typical project, we start with many unknowns - domain terms, requirements, stakeholders,
constraints, etc.  The inception offers us the perfect opportunity to sprint up the learning
curve before we need to start applying that knowledge on practical problems.


### The Agenda

Before stating what an inception *is*, let me clear up something it *is not* - an
Iteration Zero.  Google for that phrase and you'll find definitions with subtle
differences, but most of them describe an initial iteration where the
focus is developing project infrastructure and tools rather than user features.
At EdgeCase, we have tried this approach but found it lacking.  We typically
work in two week iterations.  Our experience has been that
we don't need anywhere close to two weeks for these steps - especially given the
rapid evolution of things like automated git-based deployment
solutions (e.g. heroku), authentication libraries (e.g. omniauth), and other
frameworks and tools that make it a snap to get a project's technical core in place.
We want and expect to be delivering real customer value in our first iteration, but
we need to make sure we're delivering the right value and working on the right
set of things first before we start.

Our inceptions are made up of three days of intense effort.  The first day is
all about capturing the vision for the product.  Some of the key exercises used to
do this are:

* Identification of the 4 C's - Concepts, Characteristics, Challenges, and
  Characters - that define the system, yielding a mind map of the problem space.  This is a brainstorming exercise 
  in which we gather ideas without trying to prematurely judge whether they will be implemented.
* Documentation of shared domain language.  Agreeing to a common set of terms early
  significantly improves communication within the team.
* Generate personas representing typical users of the system - what motivates them and
  what do they need to accomplish?
* Craft an elevator pitch that describes the product or system in two sentences.

On the second day of the inception, we begin the process of defining a Minimally
Viable Product (MVP).  If you've not read Eric Ries's
[The Lean Startup](http://www.theleanstartup.com), an MVP consists of the minimum
set of features you can build which allow you to learn rapidly whether or not
you are building the right thing.  We frequently are able to show customers that we
can deliver real value with a smaller feature set than they originally planned.  This set of features
is articulated through a process that consists of:

* Specifying the target audience for the MVP which can be counted on to help
  you learn.
* Creating a high level in/out list of feature areas for the MVP
* Building a [story map](http://www.agileproductdesign.com/blog/the_new_backlog.html)
  of user stories for all of the "in" features and characterizing each of
  those stories as in or out.
* Mapping out wireframes for the stories that make up the MVP.

Throughout the first and second day, we use a scratch pad area (stickies on a wall)
to capture thoughts and issues we need to circle back on later.  Some of these
will be unknowns (technical or otherwise) uncovered during the course of the first
two days that need rapid investigation.  On the third day, we reserve the
first half of the day for our team to work independently from the client on
closing some of these questions.  A couple hours spiking a technical
solution is often just enough to understand whether or not an approach is feasible.

The remaining part of the third day is essentially close-out.  We talk about
what we learned from the spikes, consider acceptance criteria for key user stories,
and discuss project management issues (e.g. roles, meetings, tools, etc.)
that will be relevant if the project moves forward beyond the inception.

After three days of this, I guarantee you that everyone involved is
exhausted but in possession of a *much* better understanding of the
what is to be built and how the project will be run.


### The Location

We're happy to run inceptions either in our office or at the client site.
Which is best is largely a function of the client.  If they are capable
of being present and focused on the incepetion, then holding it there 
may offer a tremendous opportunity for us to get visibility to the deployment
environment and talk to real users who can verify or refute the
characteristics baked into the persona exercise.

However, not every client has the discipline to stay in the inception and block out the
distractions while on site however.  In such cases, it's better to have the
inception back at our office where they can fully engage in the discussions.


### The Actors

Getting the right people in the room for an inception is the single most
important factor in determining whether or not it will succeed.  Miss out on
an important stakeholder and you risk having wasted your time when that
stakeholder later challenges decisions made in their absence.  Have too many
people in the room and you make it too easy for people to mentally check out
and not fully contribute.

We aim to have two people from EdgeCase - someone with project management skills
and someone with development skills - and two to three key client stakeholders.
The client participants need to:

* have decision making authority for the project
* be intimately familiar with the needs of customers
* be capable of giving the inception their full attention

The last of those is especially critical.  You'll find clients who believe
themselves to be so busy that they can't possibly spend two to three days of
uninterrupted time in the inception.  This is a red flag for the project.  A
business owner who can't spend the time neccesary to start a project off on
the right foot is likely to be one who won't be available to make the
decisions necessary to keep the project running smoothly once it is
running later.

### The Learnings

Here a couple of tips we've learned along the way to make your inceptions run
smoother:

* Get people up and moving from time to time.  We structure several of the
  exercises so that it requires people to get out of their chair.
  The kinetic activity stimulates the brain and brings energy back into the
  room.
* Use high quality materials.  During the course of an inception, we use
  flip charts, stickies, and a whiteboard extensively.  Before the start, we
  make sure we've got pens that are not out of ink and are visible from across
  the room.
* Make sure the client has good visibility into the agenda.  Even though we
  are intimitely familiar with the agenda and flow of the inception, for the
  client, this is likely a new process.  They want to know things like
  "when do we break for lunch?" and "how long does this activity last?".

### Conclusion

Like anything, running an inception is a continual learning experience.  Every
time we've participated in one, we've walked away with one or more new "aha"
realizations that make the next one better.  In a sense, the discovery of what
makes a for a good inception is much like what makes for a good product
idea - being humble and being prepared to constantly learn and improve.  To
quote Francis Bacon:

    If a man will begin with certainties, he shall end in doubts, but if he will
    content to begin with doubts, he shall end in certainties.

We are not yet to the point where we can say we have "ended in certainties", but
our insight on starting projects off on the right foot has most certainly
grown.  The payoff has been better projects that follow on from those inceptions.

I hope you've found this overview of the inception process helpful.  Please
send us feedback on what's working well for you and over time, we'll all begin
to erase our doubts.

### Resources

If you want to learn more about the inception process, here are two good
resources to consult:

* [The Agile Samurai](http://pragprog.com/book/jtrap/the-agile-samurai) by Jonathan
  Rasmusson has several chapters describing project inception within the context
  of agile practices.
* [Gamestorming](http://www.amazon.com/Gamestorming-Innovators-Rulebreakers-Changemakers-ebook/dp/B003XDUCLS)
  by Dave Gray, Sunni Brown, and James Macanufo is chock full of exercises you
  can use in your inceptions.  We're using many of them including 4C's, Elevator
  Pitch, Pre-Mortem in ours.
